The fast-moving, client-driven technilogical world lacks a safe place for designers and developers to voice their opinions. We're told to leave our feelings and opinions at the door, leaving the creative process uninspired. When finally given the chance to defend creative decisions, the inability to prepare takes us by surprise and we wind up coming off as defensive, leaving a bitter taste in the audience’s mouth. In this article, I’m going to define the difference between defending and defensive and explain ways to avoid being the latter.
Defending and defensive differ quite a lot in the modern day. Defending can simply be defined as giving reason to your choices objectively. In client work, defending a choice would include stats and facts to back up your words. When looking at web development, you could explain your choices with browser performance, browser support, verified web trends, experimental technology, and potential build time, to name a few. Graphic design defenses could include print costs, color trends, color schemes (analogous colors, complementary colors, etcetera), even bring in the principles and elements of design. These examples provide an explanation while treating the client with respect. While you will have to explain some of these concepts to the client as if they were five (Thanks Reddit), by using these concepts to back up the explanation for your choices, you appear to know exactly what you’re talking about. This may aid in swaying the client.
When you feel yourself putting your opinion into what you’re saying, mainly including “I”, “me”, and “my”, chances are you’re becoming defensive. Defensive is defending yourself either when a defense isn’t necessary or when you allow your opinion into the reasoning. While “This blue is too blue” may be a valid point, without facts or something with more weight than just your opinion, good chance you’re heading down a road of turning defending into defensive. Another way to think of the concept of “defensiveness” is justification. While you may feel justified in your response, if there aren’t facts yet you continue to explain your choice, you’re probably being defensive, similar to the saying “beating a dead horse”.

So how do you avoid being defensive when dealing with a client? Here are a few tips:

First rule: If you’re “dealing” with a client, there’s a good chance you’re going to walk into the meeting with a defensive mindset.
Second rule: The client is rarely wrong, especially when starting out in the field. I know that there’s much debate about this. A few examples of when a client may be wrong: what constitutes as reasonable timelines, what browsers can and cannot do, what can be accomplished with print, and costs. To avoid becoming defensive, I follow the rule “The client isn’t wrong, they’re just wrong for you”.
Third rule: Walk in with either printouts or notes of facts and stats that may relate to your job to support your claims. These may include browser usage stats, browser compatibility stats, etcetera. By bringing such papers and/or notes, you can stay on track and avoid being defensive.
Fourth rule: If you can’t stay objective about a subject, tell the client you will get back to them on that point by EOB (End of Business). This gives you time to collect your thoughts and prepare for possible backlash or continuation of the topic beyond the initial question.
Fifth rule: Ask the question “Is what I’m about to say really necessary?”. By asking this, you avoid unnecessary comments or possible backlash that may lead to defensive behavior.